hi i'm norman Wildberger in the last few
videos we've been talking about poly numbers
and associated polynomials today we're going to
continue in that vein and talk about the factor
theorem that was goes back to descartes this
is a pretty standard material found in most
high school courses and there's nothing very much
contentious about it the reason i'm going in this
direction now is because ahead of us there is a
very big obstacle very big logical foundational
obstacle having to do with polynomials and we want
to get to that point where we can address that
problem it's called the fundamental theorem
of algebra that's where we're headed okay so
we're going to introduce a little bit of extra
notation today i'll maybe simplify things a little
bit so the setup is that we've already introduced
a very special poly number the number called
alpha which is the polynomial is zero one and
alpha squared looks like this it's the polynomial
zero zero one and alpha cubed is zero zero zero
one and it obviously carries on in that fashion
and using poly number multiplication the power
alpha to the n times the power alpha to the m
is the power alpha to the n plus m because
if you have n zeros and you multiply with
the one with m zeros then the way we've defined
multiplication you get the one with n plus m zeros
all right so now we're going to introduce
a connection between poly numbers
and ordinary integers so here is a poly number
p with coefficients a0 a1 up to ak these are all
integers because we're working in the
framework today of integral poly numbers
here is the standard alpha
form for that same poly number
where we write it in terms of the powers
of alpha a zero times alpha to the zero
plus a one alpha to the one plus all
the way up to a k times alpha to the k
and we're going to introduce a new terminology
for this expression just a new way of writing it
nothing else we're going to say this is p bracket
alpha bracket and we're going to say p of alpha
it just means that we're talking about the
standard alpha form of the poly number p
and now suppose that we have an integer c
we're going to define what do we mean by
p of c in other words p bracket c bracket
it is by definition this integer what you
get when you take the standard alpha form
and simply replace all the alphas with c's
so a0 times c to the zero that's just one
so that's just a zero plus a one times c
plus a two times c squared and so on up to a sub
k times c to the k these are all integers so this
combination is also an integer that's what we
mean by p of c we call this evaluating p at c
so for example if p is the poly number 2 minus
3 0 1 and c is the integer 4 then p of c is 2
minus 3 times 4 plus 0 times 4 squared which i
don't write plus 1 times 4 cubed all together 54.
all right there's one very easy property
of this evaluation that if you take
two poly numbers and evaluate at c p plus
q evaluated at c that's p of c plus q of c
and another slightly more complicated aspect of
it is that this also works for multiplication
we have two poly numbers p and q and our
integer c then pq of c is p of c times q of c
in other words the multiplicative structure with
the alphas and with the c's is exactly the same
and it's because basically of this property
of multiplication of powers of c c to the n
times c to the m equals c to the n plus m
and that's exactly the same property that's
satisfied in the poly number context with the
powers of alpha so if we replace the alphas
with the c's then the multiplicative structure is
maintained so for example here is one polynomial p
two alpha to the zero minus three alpha one
plus alpha squared and q is alpha to the zero
minus five alpha to the one and c is four then
q of c is what well there's the product of this
integral polynomial with this integral polynomial
in standard alpha form evaluating at four
so replacing all the alphas with fours and
evaluating gives minus 114. on the other hand if
we just evaluate p by itself at four and multiply
by q by itself at four then we also get -114
now at some point it's going to become annoying
for us to always have to write alpha to the zero
plus alpha to the one and so on and so
i'm going to take the liberty now of
dropping that rather rigid requirement if
we are forced to justify ourselves formally
then we'll go back to this definition but in
practice we'll just forget the alpha 0 and write 2
and we'll forget the alpha to the 1 and just write
alpha now let's look at the factor theorem which
goes back to descartes the theorem says that if
p is an integral polynomial and c is an integer
then the polynomial p of alpha minus p of
c where we think of this as a poly number
has the factor alpha minus c where this is also
a polynomial let's have a look at the proof
so here's our poly number p p of alpha is written
in standard alpha form but in our somewhat relaxed
notation now as a0 plus a1 alpha plus a2
alpha squared up to a sub k alpha to the k
and if we evaluate p at c we get the corresponding
expression with alphas replaced by the integer c
now i have to remind you of some identities that
we've seen in a number of different times the
simplest one is the difference of squares alpha
squared minus c squared equals alpha minus c
times alpha plus c slightly going up alpha cubed
minus c cubed is alpha minus c times alpha squared
plus alpha c plus c squared and there's a whole
family of such the kth one being alpha to the k
minus c to the k is alpha minus c times this
expression so decreasing powers of alpha
increasing powers of c and we're going to apply
it immediately to prove the theorem because
we're just going to take the difference between
this line and this line so p alpha minus p of c
which is what we want interested in and in each
of these terms one over the other we're going to
take the difference and we're going to see that
there there's a factor of alpha minus c in each
of those terms a zero minus a zero is zero this
one minus this one gives us a1 times alpha minus c
this term minus this term is a common factor of
a2 and then it's alpha squared minus c squared
which according to this has a factor alpha
minus c the other factor is alpha plus c
all the way up to the kth one which has a sub k
times the difference here which according to this
is alpha minus c times this expression so we plot
that into there and in particular this poly number
is divisible by this poly number and in
fact we get a little bit of extra bonus
we in fact actually write down
exactly what the other factor is
and a very important special case
now if p of c happens to be equal to
zero in other words if c is a zero of the
polynomial p well then this term is zero
so then alpha minus c divides p of alpha
the original polynomial p so this is a
very important connection between the zeros of a
poly number and linear factors of the polynomial
it's going to be a major theme for
us so to move again towards this
fundamental theorem of algebra let's next time
look at the division algorithm for poly numbers
i hope you'll join me for that i'm
Norman Wildberger thanks for listening